[Docs] Add DR covering canonical use of `managementPolicy` (#792)
OpenAssetIO/OpenAssetIO: doc/decisions/DR014-Management-policy-responses.md

# DR014 Management Policy responses

- **Status:** Proposed
- **Driver:** @foundrytom
- **Approver:** @feltech @ecmorris @antirotor @mattdaw
- **Outcome:** A Manager should additionally imbue a `managementPolicy`
  response with the traits that it is capable of resolving/persisting
  for each trait set.

## Background

The ability for a host to query a manager's capabilities and intent is a
critical part of the OpenAssetIO abstraction.

OpenAssetIO classifies entities (assets) using a Trait Set, which lists

> one or more traits that describe it's nature. For example, and image

Reviewer: "its nature"
Github doesn't have [Gitlab's "insert suggestion" feature](https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/user/project/merge_requests/reviews/suggestions.html)? I feel bad being this pedantic without it.

Author: Thanks! If you switch to "Files Changed" view, you should be able to [do the suggestions thing](https://docs.github.com/en/pull-requests/collaborating-with-pull-requests/reviewing-changes-in-pull-requests/commenting-on-a-pull-request#adding-line-comments-to-a-pull-request).

Author: Fixed [here](https://github.com/OpenAssetIO/OpenAssetIO/pull/792/commits/59ec5fc906e84b5630641d7564614939a25f37cf) (with others).

file may have the trait set `{'file', 'image', 'raster',
'colorManaged'}`.

The `managementPolicy` method is a high-level (i.e. not entity specific)
query that a host can use to determine a manager's behaviour in relation
to a specific trait set.

The answer to this query is commonly used by a Host to conditionally
enable user-facing functionality based on the behaviour of the specific
manager that is in use.

This mechanism is flexible, and so exactly how a manager should
implement its response is potentially ambiguous. This document outlines
the rationale behind the defined canonical behaviour.

## Relevant data

Documentation pertaining to the OpenAssetIO data model:

> - [Entities, Traits and Specifications overview](../doxygen/src/EntitiesTraitsSpecifications.dox)

Author: I left this as a file link vs a hyperlink to the GitHub pages version, so it was repo local and should still work in the future, if an old revision is checked out.

Reviewer 2: Interestingly, Doxygen's markdown support includes [`@ref`s](https://doxygen.nl/manual/markdown.html#md_links), so we could one day migrate the standalone Doxygen pages so they can render in either Doxygen or markdown viewers (though obviously `@ref`s won't work in pure markdown).

such entities. It is not interested in any other kinds of entity, and
should not be involved in their creation or management.

As such, it wishes to opt-in to the management of any file-based entity,
regardless of its specific trait set.

The manager fulfills the API contract, by storing an entities trait set
in its database - allowing it to filter lookups by trait set, and
properly re-classify any given entity as required,. However, it can't
store arbitrary data, and so can't persist the data for any other
traits these entities may have.

A Host that manages several file-based entities (eg: its
main document and assorted data files that it reads/writes),
will query the manager's `managementPolicy` to determine for which of
these the manager should be involved with.

If a manager opts-out of managing any given trait set, then the host
will use its native UI/workflows for browsing and saving, if it opts-in,
then it will delegate UI and data locality responsibilities to the
manager.

So, how should this manager respond to the `managementPolicy` query for
any specific trait set?

Lets explore the scenario where the host is querying the manager's

> policy for it's native document format, and for images it generates:

Reviewer: s/it's/its/

Author: Fixed [here](https://github.com/OpenAssetIO/OpenAssetIO/pull/792/commits/59ec5fc906e84b5630641d7564614939a25f37cf) (with others).

    {}   # Generated Images
]
```

The Host would receive empty responses (`{}`) for both the original
trait sets, and so must potentially degrade and re-try its queried trait
set if it is happy with only a subset. e.g:

```python
traitSets = [
    { 'file', 'nodeGraph' },                        # Main document
    { 'file', 'image', 'raster', 'colorManaged' },  # Generated images
    { 'file', 'image', 'raster' },
    { 'file', 'image' },
    { 'file' }                                      # File
]
```

Resulting in:

```python
policies = [
    {},                    # Main document
    {},                    # Generated Images
    {},
    {},
    { 'managed': {...} },  # File
]
```

#### Pros

- Conveys only what traits are supported to the host, allowing
  behaviour to be properly adapted to the manager's capabilities.

#### Cons

- Host implementation is significantly more complicated.
- No way to hint at any additional traits that may be resolvable
  outside the typing trait set.

### Option 3 - Supported Traits Response

The host should also include any additional traits that it may attempt
to resolve in the future, e.g. if it supported the ability to customise

> t,he file format used for writing images, by resolving a custom trait:

Author: Fixed [here](https://github.com/OpenAssetIO/OpenAssetIO/pull/792/commits/59ec5fc906e84b5630641d7564614939a25f37cf) (with others).

> t,he file format used for writing images, by resolving a custom trait:

Author: Fixed [here](https://github.com/OpenAssetIO/OpenAssetIO/pull/792/commits/59ec5fc906e84b5630641d7564614939a25f37cf) (with others).

```python
traitSets =[
    { 'file', 'nodeGraph' },
    { 'file', 'image', 'raster', 'colorManaged', 'fileFormatOptions' }
]
```

The manager should respond as per Option 1, but in addition, imbue any
of the queried traits that the manager is capable of resolving:

```python
if FileTrait.kId in traitSet:
    ManagerTrait.imbueTo(policy)

>     FileTrait.imbueTo(policy)

Author: Does [this](https://github.com/OpenAssetIO/OpenAssetIO/pull/792/commits/56e6bc33745525a7283c0afab5bf46e46cabea87) help?

>     FileTrait.imbueTo(policy)

Reviewer 3: :+1:

```

This would then look like the following:

```python
policies = [
    { 'managed': {...}, 'file': {} },  # Main document
    { 'managed': {...}, 'file': {} }   # Generated Images
]
```

This indicates that the manager would like to handle interactions for
entities with these traits sets, but it can only resolve the `file`
trait.

> Note:

> > We keep the concept additionally imbuing the `managed` trait

Author: Fixed [here](https://github.com/OpenAssetIO/OpenAssetIO/pull/792/commits/59ec5fc906e84b5630641d7564614939a25f37cf) (with others).

> (though it may seem superfluous, as an empty trait set is equivalent to
> un-managed) as in practical use cases it may well have other properties
> that cover topics such as exclusivity/etc.
> There are also additional traits that may be imbued by the manager to
> determine how it handles various aspects of the publishing process,

> > e.g. thumbnails.

Reviewer 3: [Question] It's not clear to me why these other properties wouldn't become traits of their own (ie, `ExclusiveContentTrait`,) rather than being ties to the `Managed` trait.

Author: In some cases they may, but the "exclusive" flag for the managed trait felt like it made more sense to be part of it, as it is increased detail about what kind of "managed". We generally have "more detail about a specific behaviour" as properties and "different behaviours" as traits.

#### Pros

- Explicit communication of exact capabilities, so hosts and managers
  can suitably adapt behaviour.
- Facilitates functional workflows where the result of `managementPolicy`
  can be passed as the requested trait set for `resolve`.

#### Cons

- Implementation in the manager and host may be slightly more involved
  than other options in some scenarios.

## Outcome

The `managementPolicy` mechanism should always be queried with the full
trait set for any given entity specification, and any additional traits
a host may attempt to resolve/publish for that type (if known).

The response populated by a manager should include all
resolvable/persisted traits from that set, along with any additional
traits that describe the manager's behaviour.

## Rationale

> This offers the best of both worlds. It provides the highest quality

Reviewer 3: [Consider][Minor] Feel silly calling this out, but this might be an idiom that dosen't translate well.

Author: Removed [here](https://github.com/OpenAssetIO/OpenAssetIO/pull/792/commits/64249482a55a2163f83be86e5a6b30c15c129039).

information to both hosts and managers, whilst keeping the additional
programming overhead to a minimum. It allows both parties to adapt their

> business logical in an explicit and coordinated fashion.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
business logic in an explicit and coordinated fashion.
```

Author: Fixed [here](https://github.com/OpenAssetIO/OpenAssetIO/pull/792/commits/59ec5fc906e84b5630641d7564614939a25f37cf) (with others).

the rationale behind the defined canonical behaviour.

## Relevant data

Documentation pertaining to the OpenAssetIO data model:

- [Entities, Traits and Specifications overview](../doxygen/src/EntitiesTraitsSpecifications.dox)
- [Compositional data model decision record](./DR007-Hierarchical-or-compositional-traits-for-specifications.md)
- [Unified Entity data model decision record](./DR008-Unify-the-entity-data-model.md)

Notable points:

- A Trait is how OpenAssetIO describes a behaviour or quality.
- Traits consist of a unique ID, and zero or more simple-typed
  properties that further describe that trait.
- A Trait Set is an un-ordered collection of unique trait IDs.
- Trait Sets combine multiple traits to increase specificity, rather
  than meaning "or".
- A `TraitsData` instance is a dict of dicts, that can be "imbued" with
  zero or more traits and the values for any associated properties those
  traits may have. The top-level keys of this container form a Trait
  Set.
- The `managementPolicy` result is a `TraitsData` instance for each
  supplied Trait Set.
- Some managers may only care about certain specific Traits (such as

>   those describing the assets content disposition), and handle all

Author: Fixed [here](https://github.com/OpenAssetIO/OpenAssetIO/pull/792/commits/0feae9eb151d4a434a8a8f68cfe412f24ac6d376).

  'derivative entity types' the same.
- The `managementPolicy` query is not a required pre-requisite in the
  use of `resolve`, et. al. but is used to adapt application behaviour
  to improve user experience.

## Illustrative scenario

Consider a manager that manages the files for assets used in 2D
compositing.

It happily manages the node graphs used to define a comp, plus any
associated images read/written by the process. It does however, have
no interest in managing intermediate cache files that may be used
to speed up interactivity.

Its implementation pivots all behaviour around two (imaginary) traits:

- The `file` trait - indicating the entity's data is stored in a file.
- The `cache` trait - indicating that the data is re-creatable.

The manager has a fairly simple database and isn't capable of storing
arbitrary data for an entity, just the appropriate file path. It

> fulfills the API contract, by ensuring it can also store an entity's

Author: I've removed that section to avoid clouding the issue as part of the re-write [here](https://github.com/OpenAssetIO/OpenAssetIO/pull/792/commits/e813a8bc4bd9c43a1eba53c446cce51e446f9608). See if that helps?

> fulfills the API contract, by ensuring it can also store an entity's

Reviewer 2: Yeah its much clearer now, though we should make it super explicit in future API docs.

    { 'file', 'image', 'colorManaged' },
    { 'file', 'image' },
    { 'file', 'image', 'latLong', 'colorManaged' },
    { 'file', 'image', 'latLong' },
    { 'file', 'cache' },
    { 'file' }
]
```

Resulting in:

```python
policies = [
    {},
    {},
    {},
    {},
    {},
    {},
    { 'managed': {...} }
]
```

#### Pros

- Conveys only what traits are supported to the host, allowing
  behaviour to be properly adapted to the manager's capabilities.

#### Cons

- No way to know that actually the manager was interested in managing
  all but one of the requested trait sets.
- Host implementation is significantly more complicated.
- No way to hint at any additional traits that may be resolvable
  outside the typing trait set.

### Option 3 - Supported Traits Response

The host should also include any additional traits that it may attempt
to resolve in the future, e.g. if it supported the ability to customise
the file format used for writing images, or cache lifetime by resolving
a custom trait:

```python
traitSets =[
    { 'file', 'nodeGraph' },
    { 'file', 'image', 'colorManaged', 'fileFormatOptions' }
    { 'file', 'image', 'latLong', 'colorManaged', 'fileFormatOptions' }

>     { 'file', 'cache', 'retention' }

Reviewer 2: [question] In this example `'cache'` causes a short-circuit regardless what other traits are requested.

What if the manager could persist data for other kinds of cache e.g. `{ 'dbquery', 'cache' }`?  Then we have the situation where the combination of traits must be taken as a whole in order to determine whether the trait set is `'managed'`. I.e. the meaning of one trait is dependent on presence or absence of another.

I think we've discussed this can of worms before.

Might be worth clarifying in the intro that traits in a trait set don't strongly interact with each other and should be considered in isolation?

Author: I attempted to remove some of the ambiguity in the [rewrite](From that perspective, a response containing a bunch of traits we didn't ask for seems odd.), but it might need more, let me know what you think.

]
```

The manager should respond as per Option 1, but in addition, imbue any
of the queried traits that the manager is capable of resolving:

```python
if CacheTrait.kId in traitSet:
    continue
if FileTrait.kId in traitSet:

>     ManagerTrait.imbueTo(policy)

Author: Fixed [here]https://github.com/OpenAssetIO/OpenAssetIO/pull/792/commits/0feae9eb151d4a434a8a8f68cfe412f24ac6d37)

    FileTrait.imbueTo(policy)
```

This would then look like the following:

```python
policies = [
    { 'managed': {...}, 'file': {} },  # Main document
    { 'managed': {...}, 'file': {} },  # Generated images
    { 'managed': {...}, 'file': {} },  # Generated maps
    {}                                 # Temporary caches
]
```

This indicates that the manager would like to handle interactions for
entities with all except the cache traits set, but it can only resolve
the `file` trait for these.

> Note:
> We keep the concept of additionally imbuing the `managed` trait
> (though it may seem superfluous, as an empty trait set is equivalent to
> un-managed) as in practical use cases it may well have other properties
> that cover topics such as exclusivity/etc.
> There are also additional traits that may be imbued by the manager to
> determine how it handles various aspects of the publishing process,
> e.g. thumbnails.

#### Pros

- Hosts can query specific and precise trait sets, but the manager does
  not need to worry about all possible permutations.
- Explicit communication of exact capabilities, so hosts and managers
  can suitably adapt behaviour.

> - Facilitates functional workflows where the result of `managementPolicy`

Author: I added a pro as to the motivation for using normal imbued traits (you can use Trait/Specification view classes as normal on the result) as part of the rework [here](https://github.com/OpenAssetIO/OpenAssetIO/pull/792/commits/e813a8bc4bd9c43a1eba53c446cce51e446f9608).

> - Facilitates functional workflows where the result of `managementPolicy`

Author: > From that perspective, a response containing a bunch of traits we didn't ask for seems odd.

btw, The response would only ever contain a subset of the queried resolvable trait set though, so there would never be any you didn't ask for. The only additions would be the policy traits. So you can subtract the input set to get policy only, or intersect them to get resolvable only.

    {},  # Generated Images
    {},  # Generated maps
    {}   # Temporary caches
]
```

The Host would receive empty responses (`{}`) for all of the original
trait sets, and so must potentially decompose and re-try its queried
trait sets to reveal some supported sub-set. For example, if ultimately
it just needed the file path, it could try these combinations:

```python
traitSets = [
    { 'file', 'nodeGraph' },
    { 'file', 'image', 'colorManaged' },
    { 'file', 'image' },
    { 'file', 'image', 'latLong', 'colorManaged' },
    { 'file', 'image', 'latLong' },
    { 'file', 'cache' },
    { 'file' }
]
```

Resulting in:

```python
policies = [
    {},
    {},
    {},
    {},
    {},
    {},
    { 'managed': {...} }
]
```

#### Pros

- Conveys only what traits are supported to the host, allowing
  behaviour to be properly adapted to the manager's capabilities.

#### Cons

- No way to know that actually the manager was interested in managing
  all but one of the requested trait sets.
- Host implementation is significantly more complicated.
- No way to hint at any additional traits that may be resolvable
  outside the typing trait set.

### Option 3 - Supported Traits Response

> The host should also include any additional traits an entities trait set
> that it may attempt to resolve in the future, further specialising it.

Reviewer 2: [fix] Not sure of the wording here
```suggestion
The host should also include any additional traits from an entity's trait set
that it may attempt to resolve in the future, further specialising it.
```
or
```suggestion
The host should also include any additional entity traits
that it may attempt to resolve in the future, further specialising it.
```

e.g. if it supported the ability to customise the file format used for
writing images, or cache lifetime by resolving a custom trait:

```python
traitSets =[
    { 'file', 'nodeGraph' },
    { 'file', 'image', 'colorManaged', 'fileFormatOptions' }
    { 'file', 'image', 'latLong', 'colorManaged', 'fileFormatOptions' }
    { 'file', 'cache', 'retention' }
]
```

The manager should respond as per Option 1, but in addition, imbue any
of the  traits in the input trait set that the manager is capable of

> resolving or persisting data for:

Author: Clarified [here](https://github.com/OpenAssetIO/OpenAssetIO/pull/792/commits/c9e9e179c664c81963a007b3625406cca1eee51e).

  trait set.

> Note:
> Traits in the queried trait set with no properties will never be imbued
> in the result. This significantly simplifies implementation in the
> manager as it only needs to handle traits that it knows how to process
> property values for. If a host wishes to determine if any given entity
> has a particular trait, the ([forthcoming](https://github.com/OpenAssetIO/OpenAssetIO/issues/31))
> `entityTraits` method should be used.

### `entityTraits`

For each Entity Reference supplied by the Host, the Manager will return
a TraitSet containing the IDs of all traits possessed by that entity
that define its type.

This will include all traits required to correctly type that entity,
regardless of whether the Manager is capable of provided data for all of
those traits. I.e the Trait Set the entity was registered with if
created through the API.

E.g. in the above scenario, the Manager would be expected to return `{
'file', 'image', 'colorMangaed' }` (i.e. those of the
`ImageSpecification`) for any images, even though it will only ever
resolve/register `file` trait data.

This is the differentiator between `entityTraits` and `managementPolicy`

> - this queries the type of a specific entity, the other its data policy

Reviewer 2: [fix] This renders as a bullet point, doesn't look like that was the intention.

Author: FIxed [here](https://github.com/OpenAssetIO/OpenAssetIO/pull/792/commits/e25d8e67d0f71dd4ae20d0e92f4799ca9609f863), thanks. Interestingly it rendered fine in my local engine.

for a specific type of entity.

### `resolve`

For each Entity Reference and the Trait Set supplied by the host, the
Manager will return a `TraitsData` instance imbued with:

> - Any trait with associated property values that is understood by

Reviewer 2: [consider] Perhaps worth emphasising the point that `resolve` cannot be used to check if an entity has a specific trait, since only traits with properties will be imbued in the response.

On a related note, what about traits that _can_ have properties, but the property values are (currently) blank/unset? Perhaps worth a clarification here that an unset property is still a valid value and so the TraitsData will be imbued with that (empty) trait.

Author: Added [here](https://github.com/OpenAssetIO/OpenAssetIO/pull/792/commits/7da4a533006c0c2464333cc1a35cd09f46ca4f5c).

Author: And [here](https://github.com/OpenAssetIO/OpenAssetIO/pull/792/commits/c9e9e179c664c81963a007b3625406cca1eee51e).

  the Manager that the Entity has data for.

> Note:
> This means the traits imbued in the result should match (or be a
> subset of) the intersection of the requested trait set and those
> imbued in the `managementPolicy` response when queried with the
> entity's trait set. I.e, no traits here that weren't in the policy
> response.

### `preflight`

For each Entity Reference and the Trait Set supplied by the Host, the
Manager will:

> - Error if a required Trait is missing from the supplied trait set (i.e.

Reviewer 2: [question] Is this just a general comment, or does this relate to the DR somehow?  I.e. can the host use `managementPolicy` to determine the required traits?

Author: Was just for completeness, whilst we were there. It felt with including given the change proposed here is all about increasing the quality of information provided about what traits are supported/etc.

  it is missing data required to fully define the resulting entity).

### `register`

For each Entity Reference and `TraitsData` supplied by the Host, the
manager will persist:

- The complete Trait Set (i.e. trait ids) to form the typing information.
- The values for the properties of any traits in the set that it
  reported as being supported in response to a write context

>   `managementPolicy` query for the supplied data's trait Set.

Author: https://github.com/OpenAssetIO/OpenAssetIO/pull/792/commits/da780085174e8f38b4e6c9bc38f4cb1270aaca61

- The `managementPolicy` query is not a required pre-requisite in the
  use of `resolve`, et. al. but is used to adapt application behaviour
  to improve user experience.
- Resolvable traits (i.e. those that hold Entity-specific data) should
  always have properties. Property-less traits should only be used as
  classifiers or it is not possible to tell the difference between

>   missing data and non-applicable traits.

Author: Yeah, it's hard to do without a runtime registry though as at that point, you just have a trait ID.

Option 2 precludes the ability to differentiate between unmanaged trait
sets and unresolvable component traits and so is not a viable option.

## Further notes

The chosen option effectively formalises the meaning of related API
methods as follows:

### `managementPolicy`

For each Trait Set supplied by the Host (defining a concrete Entity type
specialisation), the Manager will return a `TraitsData` instance imbued
with:

- Domain-specific policy traits that describe the Manager's handling of

>   entities with that trait set.

Author: Yeah, we def need to update the docs once all this is settled - we have some notes on that, but not enough yet. (btw, all traits are domain specific now). Will try and get it done as part of https://github.com/OpenAssetIO/OpenAssetIO/issues/788.

- Any traits from the query set that have properties whose data can be
  resolved by (read context) or registered with (write context) the
  Manager when the supplied Entity Reference points to an entity of that
  trait set.

> Note:
> Traits in the queried trait set with no properties will never be imbued
> in the result. This significantly simplifies implementation in the
> manager as it only needs to handle traits that it knows how to process
> property values for. If a host wishes to determine if any given entity
> has a particular trait, the ([forthcoming](https://github.com/OpenAssetIO/OpenAssetIO/issues/31))
> `entityTraits` method should be used.

### `entityTraits`

For each Entity Reference supplied by the Host, the Manager will return
a TraitSet containing the IDs of all traits possessed by that entity
that define its type.

This will include all traits required to correctly type that entity,

> regardless of whether the Manager is capable of provided data for all of

Author: Good spot, thanks, fixed [here](https://github.com/OpenAssetIO/OpenAssetIO/pull/792/commits/0feae9eb151d4a434a8a8f68cfe412f24ac6d376).
